# Cognitive Biases in Language Models
This repository contains the code for the paper "Do Language Models Exhibit the Same Cognitive Biases in Problem Solving as Human Learners?", presented at ICML 2024.

## Setup
To install the required packages, run:

``pip install -r requirements.txt``

## Data Generation

- Generate Uninstantiated World Models </br>
Run `generate_linear_world_model.py` to generate empty linear world models. `generate_consistency_model.py` generates pairs which differ only in consistency. `generate_dual_models.py` generates a comparison problem and a transfer problem both implying the same arithmetic computation. 

- Instantiate and Convert Problems to Natural Language </br>
Run `generate_data.py` to generate natural language word problem data sets from empty world models. `generate_comp.py` and `generate_trans.py` can be used to generate pairs of problems which share the same variable instantiations for comparison vs transfer experiments. `generate_carry.py` and `generate_nocarry.py` can be used to generate pairs of problems which are identical up to differences in variable quantities, where the problems generated by the former always contain carries. 

## Evaluation 

Run `python eval.py` to load a model, evaluate it, and store its preditions. The arguments are handeld using [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/):
- `test_type` indicates for which of the three biases considered in the paper the model should be test for (`consistency`, `comparison_vs_transfer`, or `carry`) 
- `model` the HuggingFace identifier of the model that should be tested
- `solution_mode` indicates how teh model should be prompted (`direct` or `cot`)
- `data_path` is the path to `.csv` file containing the problems generated for the corresponding `test_type`
- `hf_token_path` is the path to a `.txt` file containing a token to access gated HuggingFace models (e.g., LLaMA2)

The default configuration can be found in `conf/config_eval.yaml`. The script stores the predictions in `eval_out/[test_type]/[solution_mode]/[model_id]` and uploads the metrics on `wandb`. You can disable wandb sync by setting `wandb_mode=offline`.

## Cite

Please cite as:

```
@inproceedings{opedal2024language,
  title = {Do Language Models Exhibit the Same Cognitive Biases in Problem Solving as Human Learners?},
  author = {Opedal, Andreas and Stolfo, Alessandro and Shirakami, Haruki and Jiao, Ying and Cotterell, Ryan and Schölkopf, Bernhard and Saparov, Abulhair and Sachan, Mrinmaya},
  booktitle = {Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning},
  month = july,
  year = {2024},
  url = {https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.18070},
}
```



